The King of England meets a Scottish philosopher for dinner. The King proudly tells the philosopher that his new tax on foreign goods is working and has reduced his country’s imports. The philosopher curiously asks, “Why do you want to reduce your country’s imports?” The King is dumbstruck, “I don’t know… Isn’t that what I am supposed to do?”Throughout history, many of the unspoken assumptions and beliefs of society have subtly been shaped by ideas from economists. These beliefs set new frameworks for thinking that dramatically affect how rulers and the public behave, whether they realize it or not (see table below).We can see people setting rules and making important decisions, so we often think society is simply ruled by laws and people. What we can’t see as easily are the societal assumptions and beliefs that put people into positions of power and shape worldviews.The King in our story thought he was setting the agenda for his country, but he had unwittingly accepted the beliefs and goals of mercantilist economists from the past. Can you say the King was really in charge?The harshest economic truth is that “the ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are right and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly understood… Practical men who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influence, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist.”[1]Footnotes[1] https://cas2.umkc.edu/economics/...

What is the ultimate truth of life? I always question myself, “Is life worth living?” There can be a lot of answers which might make you satis...

Adam Smith identified the harshest truth of economics in the Wealth of Nations. Market value has no relationship to usefulness or morality.The observation can be illustrated (as Smith did) with a metaphor about the value of diamonds and water. Diamonds had high market value because they were rare. Water had little market value because it was abundant (i.e., in England at the time). Yet, water was essential for sustaining life, while diamonds clearly had minimal value for sustaining life.Stated abstractly and generally: the value of something in the market has no relationship to its utilitarian value. Instead, the market value of a good is determined by its availability and scarcity.Man, if you think about it, that is harsh.We all may want the economy to place value on the goods we favor, or in ways to support the outcomes we favor, but markets will abide no such directive. Value emerges from much more impersonal forces — in the tug between the supply of goods and the demand for them.

A strong economy relies on people buying stupid shit.“advertisers will have spent $72.09 billion on U.S. digital advertising by the end of 2016″72.09 Billion dollars to convince people that they NEED these new products.Now I’m not here to preach that we should all become rational and buy only necessities, because a strong economy relies on people buying things that aren’t essential what so ever.A strong economy relies on you saying hey, I’ve had this phone for a year, so it’s obviously garbage now.“The U.S. economy remains the largest in the world in terms of nominal GDP. The $19.42 trillion U.S. economy is 25% of the gross world product. “Read more: The World's Top 10 Economies | Investopedia https://www.investopedia.com/art...In many westernized countries, people live by a simple phrase.They may not know it, but it’s there.It’s simple…. “New is always better.”This lie, and the help of the destruction of half the world post wwII, is what has catapulted America to the strongest economy in the world.This lie is essential in our modern world; if everyone decided to be rational and logical human beings, our economy would suffer tremendously.So instead, billions of dollars must be spent on advertising to keep people fantasizing about new products.In America we aren’t focused on more free time; we aren’t focused on family; we aren’t focused on advanced intellect or saving humanity; we aren’t focused on space travel; we aren’t focused on education….Everyone is focused on living like the people in the advertisements, living like the people in the movies, and buying every damn thing we could possibly conceive.The American economy is so massive because if you asked people what their goals are in life the vast majority are going to tell you something along the lines of “I wan’t this car, I wan’t this house, I wan’t these things, and oh maybe 2 kids, a nice spouse, and possibly happiness.”Peoples lives are centered on material obsession rather than family, fun, friends, and happiness.But this is where the twist comes, we’ve been convinced that everything else comes after we obtain the materials.A great economy relies on lies.It relies on a box that is just the right color, and catches your eye.It relies on a product positioned just at eye level.It relies on emotional manipulation, those warm feelings you get when you watch commercials that seem to have nothing to do with the product or service they are advertising, but you still remember the product of service because of commercial.It relies on psychological techniques that have been practiced and perfected since the early 50’s.A great economy relies on people deciding that working their ass off to obtain money to buy product that will likely be thrown out in a year, is better than spending time with your family.Lastly, a great economy relies on people passing up purchasing essentials, like healthy food, socks, underwear, and heating to purchase a nice new Iphone or a new car which you won’t even understand how to use 99% of its advertised features.The world actually does revolve around money, and that world relies on people buying stupid shit.(Photo taken from wikipedia)

What is the ultimate truth of life? I always question myself, “Is life worth living?” There can be a lot of answers which might make you satis...

What is the harshest truth of economics?
Economics
